---
layout: post
title: Third Update
author: Mateo de Mayo
date: 2021-03-14 21:30:00 -0300
abstract: >
  Making the Qwerty driver ready for a merge request was quite more work than
  originally expected. However, the MR is now published and awaiting review.
  As my classes start again tomorrow I will need to narrow down my focus to
  compensate for the time I will not have.
brief: Submitting the Qwerty driver for review.
---

## Qwerty Submission

It seems that I've been a victim of the [90-90 rule][ninety-ninety] with the
last *"tiny little details"* of the Qwerty driver for Monado for emulating VR
devices with keyboard and mouse. In my [previous update][vr-update-2] I naively
thought it was almost ready for submitting for review and that I would have
extra time for other VR-related topics.

Even though I was naive, the MR is now [published][qwerty-mr] and awaiting
review. In this post, I will talk about what things I originally overlooked that
needed to be dealt with to make Qwerty worth publishing.

## External Tools

For starters, I didn't even have CMake files setup for compiling Qwerty. I was
only using Meson. Both CMake and Meson were new for me as I've not used them for
more than compiling other projects. So I took the time to learn a bit of the
former (I already had learned a bit of Meson by that time) and adapt the project
build files for my needs. Eventually, both Meson and CMake needed to be modified
to conditionally compile Qwerty based on the presence of SDL in the system as
this is now a dependency for the driver.

Regarding documentation, Doxygen has a considerable number of commands and
functionalities to use, so I took the time to read through them and see which
ones are the most used in Monado. In the process, I caught some missing
documentation entities and opened a [MR for that][doxygen-mr]. When
reading Doxygen documentation of other projects I always felt I didn't quite
understand how the contents were grouped and why they seemed to have so much
redundancy. I now see how that works, the different concepts the tool uses
(entities, groups, modules, member groups, sections, and so on) may not be very
intuitive if you are not familiar with the definitions Doxygen assigns to them.
Knowing how battle-tested the tool is I was surprised by my luck to run into a
[Doxygen bug][doxygen-bug] that affected my use case.

## Overlooked Features

These were all features I had not given enough attention but that when
considering the submission of the driver I realized how essential they were.

Previously the driver had my keyboard ID hardcoded for probing Qwerty devices.
Previously I had submitted a [MR][autoprobe-many-mr] to make it possible to
"auto probe" many devices at once because that would let me get rid of my
hardcoded keyboard ID when creating the devices. I got to use this
feature.

The controllers can now be optionally "attached" to the HMD (or "parented" to or
"follow" it), if not you would need to drag each device to the location you want
to go in the OpenXR app; first the HMD, then one controller and then the other.
The usability of this feature together with the "reset position" one was greatly
improved, and now it is possible to select exactly what controller you want to
attach/detach or reset position. Unfortunately, this attachment feature does not
work for non-qwerty HMDs (but hopefully it will in the future), which brings me
to the next paragraph.

Qwerty did not work with other devices and with a second thought, you quickly
realize that it would be a crime to not make it work and be a complement to
other devices the user may have. It could fill any lack of devices for the user.
They might only have the right controller, and Qwerty could provide them a
virtual HMD and left controller. Or maybe they only have an HMD and qwerty
provides them both controllers to try out interactions in their app. First I
made it possible for the driver to work with external HMDs and then I reworked
the input logic to flawlessly (at least in principle) work with any other
devices. The catch in this is that I didn't have any physical devices to try
this out. The Monado Discord server helped me out with this, and I tested that
everything worked with non-qwerty devices based on the Dummy driver. I hope this
is working well with physical devices.

Other features that were already present in Monado that were of great help were
the logging system, the ability to introduce an environment variable
`QWERTY_ENABLE` to easily toggle the driver usage and, the coolest one I think,
was the variable tracking UI. It let me with very little time implement a decent
UI for the driver that makes it a lot easier to use for Monado users (though
it is intended only for debugging and might be a bit unsafe).

## Refactor

While implementing many features and changes to the driver I needed to better
organize my files, classes, and methods to have a good separation of concerns. I
created the [`qwerty_system`] to manage the driver-global properties and to
organize the [`qwerty_hmd`] and [`qwerty_controller`]s which now derive from my
original [`qwerty_device`] class. All of these now reside in the
[`qwerty_device.{c,h}`][qwerty-src] files as they are all friends of the
[`qwerty_device`].

I reduced the coupling of my driver with the rest of Monado as much as possible
by, for example, moving all the SDL input logic into the driver to
[`qwerty_sdl.c`]. The contra of this is that now the driver directly depends on
SDL, though the SDL logic inside the driver is isolated and it should be
easy to add new input logic using other libraries like XCB.

By this time my [original branch][qwerty-raw-history] had close to a hundred
little and erratic commits because I was also using it to study and annotate
over parts of Monado. So I redid the [commit history][qwerty-history] before the
MR to try and tell a story as concise as possible of the changes. While the
[MR][qwerty-mr] ended up being a lot bigger than I would've preferred to not
overwhelm the reviewers I hope the new change list is clear enough to help with
the review process.

## What's Next

My classes start tomorrow and my time for VR will be reduced quite a bit so I
need to narrow down my focus. I will be following up and making any adjustments
the driver requires to get merged but whatever my next objective is I need it to
be concise and relatively well defined. The topics I mentioned in the [last
post][vr-update-2-next] are still valid, though I need to first define my
objective in the next few days.

I am very happy with the work I did with the Monado codebase and I think it will
prove to be very useful for the next steps I take, whatever those might be.

[ninety-ninety]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ninety-ninety_rule
[qwerty-mr]: https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/monado/monado/-/merge_requests/714
[vr-update-2]: /blog/vr-update-2
[doxygen-mr]: https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/monado/monado/-/merge_requests/708
[doxygen-bug]: https://github.com/doxygen/doxygen/issues/8418
[`qwerty_system`]: https://github.com/mateosss/monado/blob/8b2015f8a39a779826198f4a03b760d7e21524df/src/xrt/drivers/qwerty/qwerty_device.h#L31
[`qwerty_device`]: https://github.com/mateosss/monado/blob/8b2015f8a39a779826198f4a03b760d7e21524df/src/xrt/drivers/qwerty/qwerty_device.h#L45
[`qwerty_hmd`]: https://github.com/mateosss/monado/blob/8b2015f8a39a779826198f4a03b760d7e21524df/src/xrt/drivers/qwerty/qwerty_device.h#L70
[`qwerty_controller`]: https://github.com/mateosss/monado/blob/8b2015f8a39a779826198f4a03b760d7e21524df/src/xrt/drivers/qwerty/qwerty_device.h#L77
[qwerty-src]: https://github.com/mateosss/monado/tree/8b2015f8a39a779826198f4a03b760d7e21524df/src/xrt/drivers/qwerty
[`qwerty_sdl.c`]: https://github.com/mateosss/monado/blob/8b2015f8a39a779826198f4a03b760d7e21524df/src/xrt/drivers/qwerty/qwerty_sdl.c#L90
[qwerty-raw-history]: https://github.com/mateosss/monado/commits/mateosss/qwerty-raw
[qwerty-history]: https://github.com/mateosss/monado/commits/mateosss/qwerty
[autoprobe-many-mr]: https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/monado/monado/-/merge_requests/699
[vr-update-2-next]: /blog/vr-update-2#whats-next
