---
layout: post
title: First Update
author: Mateo de Mayo
date: 2021-02-15 00:00:00 -0300
abstract: >
  These blog posts are a way to share and document my experience learning
  about VR, OpenXR and graphics in general. Hopefully, this will be the first of
  many to come.
excerpt: Starting out with VR. OpenXR, Monado and Vulkan.
---

## Background

Graphics programming must be *the* area of software I've come across with the
most without ever really diving into it.

- One-shot shaders and one-afternoon-lasting knowledge of them for a game.
- Dealing with asset optimizations, picking the right formats.
- Dealing with some pre-implemented OpenGL to do and perform the way I wanted it
  to.
- Using a GPU for crunching numbers but never rendering those numbers.

All of those and more are instances in which I was indirectly working with
graphics libraries, frameworks and concepts. *Textures, z-buffers, render
targets, framebuffers* and many others are terms I came across and tried to
understand in these contexts. A rough idea of the big picture, the rendering
pipeline was generally useful but without a strong knowledge about it, the
concepts sometimes did just not fit together as well as I would've wanted them
to.

Hopefully, this is about to change. Right now I'm in the process of learning
many of these concepts to use them in the context of VR. What I will do in VR?
Well, it's not entirely clear right now, it may have something to do with
[SLAM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simultaneous_localization_and_mapping), but
it'll surely involve using the OpenXR standard and Monado (an open source
OpenXR runtime for Linux).

## Monado

[Monado](https://monado.dev/) is an open source runtime for the OpenXR standard.
Khronos provides [header
files](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenXR-SDK) and a
[loader](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenXR-SDK-Source) that finds a runtime
that has the code for those headers. I will not go into too much detail but just
reference as a good resource the Monado [getting
started](https://monado.freedesktop.org/getting-started.html) page.

I spend some time carefully compiling and placing each
dependency as I'm running a distro based on Ubuntu 18.04 which is not
recommended by the Monado team. So far everything is working fine. Just for
reference, I needed to compile and/or install newer versions of `cmake`, `meson`,
[`glslang-tools`](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glslang/releases/tag/master-tot)
and [`libcjson-dev`](https://github.com/DaveGamble/cJSON#building).

Once Monado was installed I tried out the `hello_xr` from Khronos, the blender
OpenXR plugin, and the ["developing with
Monado"](https://monado.freedesktop.org/developing-with-monado.html) example. I
recommend doing a complete read of the Monado website, it has very useful
information. I didn't even know what an HMD was at first, but the site has
plenty of terms to search about and get a better idea of the vocabulary.

## OpenXR

To familiarize myself with the OpenXR standard I cloned the
[`openxr-simple-example`](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/monado/demos/openxr-simple-example)
demo from Monado's [GitLab](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/monado). There is
a file with about 1500 lines of commented code that goes through every OpenXR
step to have some cubes moving in OpenGL. The way I approached this read was to
have the OpenXR spec and headers at hand while reading the code. I took my time
reading and going off on tangents.

In this repo, there is also a `math_3d.h` file that is quite well written and
has basic math functions for graphics. There were some of them I didn't have
theoretical bases to understand. Also, there was quite a bit of OpenGL rendering
code in the `main.c` file that I did not really understood. These two aspects of
graphics, the theory and the library specifics like OpenGL and Vulkan are things
I know are very related to OpenXR and will need to dive into.

The OpenXR API itself takes a lot of inspiration from Vulkan. For instance, the
way of working with structs and the famous *thousand lines* from Vulkan seems to
apply to OpenXR too. It is a bit cumbersome at first to read the code as
sometimes you may need more than ten lines just to make a call because you need
to fill some structs that then get passed as a parameter to an API call. Once
you get used to it though, it is quite straightforward. The key is to identify
the right concepts and their hierarchy.
[This](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F6jZCwko1Qs) talk helped with that.

## Vulkan

After I finished reading the `openxr-simple-example`, I decided to dig a bit
into the graphics library side with Vulkan. As I've heard that it is more
explicit I figured it would be a good idea to start with it instead of OpenGL
with the hopes that some concepts may translate into OpenGL in some way.

I went with the 7-part introduction to Vulkan at
<https://www.fasterthan.life/blog>. It provides a good top-down overview of how
Vulkan works. Again with the spec at hand, it is quite a similar task to the
previous one. Here the similarities between Vulkan and OpenXR start to shine.
Right now I'm reading the last parts of this tutorial.

## Meta

It is good to join the Discord and Slack of Monado, xrdesktop and OpenXR.
I've not made any questions yet mainly because the ones I had were answered with
some more hours of reading, but it is nice to see what the community is talking
about. It lets you understand a bit better the projects, who uses them and what
are the state of things around them.

Also, when I dive into a new topic I like to get soaked in it. I subscribed and
started to watch some consumer VR channels and watched some Skyrim VR mods
development on youtube. I got interested in the Quest 2 even though there
seems to be no mention of it in the spec nor in Monado. Will need to further
investigate.

Lastly, I created this blog from scratch using Jekyll. I know I should've just
used a template but my impulses were stronger.

## What's next

This is what I've been to. What about what I'll be doing the following
weeks? First of all, I'll finish the Vulkan tutorial I'm doing. After that,
however, I'm not yet certain but will probably be some of the following.

- Dive more into Vulkan.
- Implement something in OpenXR.
- Learn OpenGL.
- Learn computer graphics theory.
- Learn about SLAM ([openslam.org](https://openslam-org.github.io/) from [this
  talk](https://youtu.be/bpUKx7x-BEQ?t=1450))
- Read the internals of Monado, maybe write a test driver.

Besides all of the above, what I would like to do now, is to come up with a
project to do. That would probably be the best way to learn any of the concepts
and libraries mentioned.
